Dear Sir, You are pleased to ask again, with some earnest-
ness, for my thoughts on recent events in France. I shan’t
give you reason to imagine that I think my sentiments are so
valuable that I want to be asked for them. They are of too
little consequence to be very anxiously either communicated
or withheld. . . . In the first letter I had the honour to write to
you, which at length I send, I wrote neither for or from any
description [see Glossary] of men, nor shall I in this letter. My
errors, if any, are my own. My reputation alone is to answer
for them.

The long letter I have already sent you shows you that
though I heartily wish that France may be animated by a
spirit of rational liberty, and that I think you are bound in
all honest policy to provide •a permanent body in which that
spirit may reside and •an effective organ by which it may act,
it is my misfortune to have great doubts regarding several
important aspects of your recent doings.

When you wrote last, you thought I might be counted
among those who approve of certain proceedings in France,
because of the solemn public seal of approval they have
received from two clubs of gentlemen in London—the Consti-
tutional Society and the Revolution Society.

I have the honour to belong to several clubs in which
the •constitution of this kingdom and the •principles of the
glorious revolution [see Glossary] are held in high reverence,
and I count myself among the most forward in my zeal
for maintaining that constitution and those principles in
their utmost purity and vigour. It is because I do so that I
think it necessary that there should be no mistake ·about
what this zeal involves·. Those who cultivate the memory of
our revolution and are attached to the constitution of this
kingdom will take good care not to get involved with the persons who, under the pretext of zeal toward the revolution
and the constitution, often wander from their true principles
and are ready on every occasion to depart from the firm but
cautious and deliberate spirit that produced the revolution
and that presides in the constitution. Before addressing the
more substantial matters in your letter, I shall give you what
information I have been able to obtain concerning the two
clubs that have taken it upon themselves to interfere in the
concerns of France. I start by assuring you that I am not
and never have been a member of either.

The first, calling itself the Constitutional Society or Soci-
ety for Constitutional Information or some such title, is seven
or eight years old, I believe. This society appears to have a
purpose that is charitable, and to that extent praiseworthy.
It was established for the circulation, at the expense of
the members, of many books that few others would spend
money on and that might lie on the hands of the publishers,
causing great loss to that useful body of men. Whether
these charitably circulated books were ever as charitably
read is more than I know. Possibly several of them have been
exported to France and, like goods not in demand here, may
have found a market with you there. I have heard much talk
of the enlightenment that can be gained from books that are
sent from England. What improvements they underwent en
route (as it is said some liquors are improved by crossing
the sea) I cannot tell; but I never heard a man of common
judgment or the least degree of information speak a word in
praise of the greater part of the publications circulated by
that society; and no-one (except some of its members) has
regarded its doings as of any serious consequence.

Your National Assembly seems to have much the same
opinion that I do of this poor ‘charitable’ club. As a nation,
you reserved the whole stock of your eloquent acknowledge-
ments for the Revolution Society, when in fairness their
fellows in the Constitutional Society were entitled to some
share. Since you have selected the Revolution Society as
the great object of your national thanks and praises, you
will excuse me for making its recent conduct the subject
of my observations. The National Assembly of France has
given importance to these gentlemen by adopting them; and
they return the favour by acting as a committee in England
for extending the principles of the National Assembly. So
now we must consider them as a kind of privileged persons,
as considerable members of the diplomatic body. This is
one among the revolutions that have given splendour to
obscurity, and distinction to invisible merit. I don’t recall
having heard of this club until very recently. I am quite sure
that it never occupied a moment of my thoughts or, I believe,
of the thoughts of anyone outside their own set. I find,
upon inquiry, that on the anniversary of the Revolution in
1688 a club of dissenters [see Glossary] (of I don’t know what
denomination) have long had the custom of hearing a sermon
in one of their churches and spending the rest of the day
cheerfully, as other clubs do, at the tavern. But I never heard
that any public measure or political system—let alone the
merits of the constitution of any foreign nation—had been
the subject of a formal proceeding at their festivals; until
to my astonishment I found them issuing a congratulatory
address that gave authoritative approval to the activities of
the National Assembly in France.

I see nothing to object to in the original principles and
conduct of the club, at least so far as they were declared. I
think it very probable that for some purpose new members
may have entered among them, and that some truly Chris-
tian politicians, who love to dispense benefits but are careful
to conceal the hand that distributes the dole, may have made
them the instruments of their pious designs. [That is a joke.
Burke is suggesting that the Revolution Society has been taken over by ‘new members’; he doesn’t seriously think that their purposes are ‘pious’ or that their attitude to secrecy is ‘truly Christian‘.] Whatever I may have reason to suspect concerning private goings-on, I shall speak only of what is public.

